# MySQL Connector

This custom connector extracts metadata from MySQL databases for import into [BigQuery universal catalog](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/catalog-overview).

Custom connectors are part of the [Managed Connectivity framework](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/managed-connectivity-overview) and are responsible for the export of metadata from external systems into correctly formatted import files. Import of metadata files generated by this connector and building pipelines is covered below in the section [Import metadata into universal catalog](#import-metadata-into-universal-catalog). 
See [Develop Custom Connectors](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/develop-custom-connector) for more information about custom connectors for universal catalog.

Note that metadata for MySQL instances running on [Cloud SQL](https://cloud.google.com/sql/mysql) can be collected automatically and this connector is not required for these. See [catalog integration](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/dataplex-catalog-integration) for details.

This is not an officially supported Google product and is provided on an as-is basis, without warranty. This project is not eligible for the [Google Open Source Software Vulnerability Rewards
Program](https://bughunters.google.com/open-source-security).

### Target objects and schemas:

Metadata for the following database objects is extracted by the connector:
|Object|Metadata Extracted|
|---------|------------|
|Tables|Table name, column names, column data types, column NULL/NOT NULL|
|Views|View name, column names, column data types, column NULL/NOT NULL|

### Parameters
The MySQL connector takes the following parameters:

|Parameter|Description|Default|Required/Optional|
|---------|------------|----|-------------|
|target_project_id|Google Cloud Project ID. Used in the generated metadata and defines the scope metadata will be imported into||REQUIRED|
|target_location_id|Google Cloud Region ID, or 'global'. Used in the generated metadata and indicates the region Entries will be associated with||REQUIRED|
|target_entry_group_id|Entry Group ID which the Entries will be associated with||REQUIRED|
|host|MySQL server to connect to||REQUIRED|
|port|MySQL server port (usually 3306)||REQUIRED|
|database|MySQL database to connect to||REQUIRED|
|user|MySQL Username to connect with||REQUIRED|
|password_secret|ID in Secret Manager holding the password for the user. Format: projects/{PROJECT-ID}/secrets/{SECRET}||REQUIRED|
|local_output_only|Generate metadata import file in local directory only, do not push to Cloud Storage|False|OPTIONAL|
|output_bucket|Cloud Storage bucket where output metadata import file will be stored. Required if **--local_output_only False**||REQUIRED|
|output_folder|Folder in Cloud Storage bucket where the output metadata import file will be stored. Required if **--local_output_only False**||
|jar|Name/full path to JDBC jar file if not using the default|mysql-connector-j-9.2.0.jar|OPTIONAL|
|min_expected_entries|Minimum number of entries expected in generated metadata import file. If not met then file is not uploaded to Cloud Storage|-1|OPTIONAL|

Note: **target_project_id**, **target_location_id** and **target_entry_group_id** are used as string values in the generated metadata import file only and do not need to match the project where the connector is being run. These three values define the job scope used when importing the metadata into the catalog, see [components of a metadata job](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/import-metadata#components) for details.

### Prepare your MySQL environment:

Best practice is to connect to the database with a dedicated user that has the minimum privileges required to extract metadata.

1. Create a user in the MySQL instance with the following privileges: 
    * SELECT on information_schema.tables
    * SELECT on information_schema.columns
    * SELECT on information_schema.views

2. Add the password for the user to the Secret Manager in your google cloud project and note the ID (format is: projects/{project-number}/secrets/{secret-name})

## Set up and run the connector

The metadata connector can be run directly from the command line by executing the main.py script.

#### Prerequisites

The following tools and libraries are required to run the connector:

* Python 3.x. Installation on Linux:
    ```
    sudo apt update
    sudo apt install python3 python3-dev python3-venv python3-pip
    ```
* Python Virtual Environment. To create the environment and activate:
    ```shell
    python3 -m venv env
    source env/bin/activate
    ```
* Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
    ```shell
    sudo apt install default-jre
    ```
* Install PySpark
    ```shell
    pip3 install pyspark
    ```

* The user that runs the connector must be authenticated with a Google Cloud identity in order to access the APIs for Secret Manager and Cloud Storage. You can use [Application Default Credentials](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/auth/application-default/login) for this. If you are not running the connector in a Google Cloud managed environment then you need to install the [Google Cloud SDK](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/install). 

```bash
    gcloud auth application-default login
```

Note:  The authenticated user must have the following IAM roles in the project where the connector runs:

- roles/secretmanager.secretAccessor
- roles/storage.objectUser

#### Set-up
* Ensure you are in the root directory of the connector
    ```bash
    cd mysql-connector
    ```
* Install all python dependencies 
    ```bash
    pip3 install -r requirements.txt
    ```
* Download **mysql-connector-j-9.2.0.jar** [from MySQL](https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/connector/j/?os=26) and store it in the current directory.
    * **Note** If you need to use a different version of the JDBC jar then add the **--jar** parameter when running the connector. eg  --jar mssql-jdbc-12.10.2.jre11.jar

#### Run the connector
To execute metadata extraction run the following command, substituting appropriate values and parameters for your environment as needed:

```shell 
python3 main.py \
--target_project_id gcp-project-id \
--target_location_id us-central1 \
--target_entry_group_id mysql \
--host the-mysql-server \
--port 3306 \
--user dataplexagent \
--password_secret projects/gcp-project-number/secrets/dataplexagent_mysql \
--database employees \
--output_bucket dataplex_connectivity_imports \
--output_folder mysql_metadata
```

### Connector Output:
The connector generates a metadata import file in JSONL format as described [in the documentation](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/import-metadata#metadata-import-file) and stores the file locally in the 'output' directory. The connector also uploads the file to the Google Cloud Storage bucket and folder specified in the **--output_bucket** and **--output_folder** parameters unless **--local-output_only True** is used.

A sample output from the MySQL connector can be found in the [sample](sample/) directory.

## Import metadata into universal catalog

Before importing metadata into universal catalog, the Entry Group and all Entry Types and Aspect Types found in the metadata import file must exist in the target project and location (either a Google Cloud region, or 'global'). This connector requires the following Entry Group, Entry Types and Aspect Types:

|Catalog Object|IDs required by connector|
|---------|-------------------|
Entry Group| Defined in **--target_entry_group_id** when metadata is extracted.|
Entry Types|**mysql-instance**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-database**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-table**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-view**|  
Aspect Types|**mysql-instance**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-database**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-table**&nbsp;&nbsp;**mysql-view**| 

See [manage entries and create custom sources](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/ingest-custom-sources) for instructions on creating Entry Groups, Entry Types, and Aspect Types.


To manually import a metadata import file generated by this connector into universal catalog see the documentation [Import metadata using a custom pipeline](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/import-metadata#import-metadata) for instructions on calling the API and considerations when importing custom metadata. The [sample](/sample) directory contains a sample metadata import file and request file you can use to import into the catalog.

To create an end-to-end pipeline which extracts metadata and starts an Import API job to bring the generated file into universal catalog, see the section [Create an end-to-end metadata extraction and import pipeline to universal catalog](#create-an-end-to-end-metadata-extraction-and-import-pipeline-to-universal-catalog)

## Build a container and run the connector with Dataproc Serverless

Building a docker container allows the connector to be run from a variety of Google Cloud services including [Dataproc Serverless](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc-serverless/docs).

### Build the container (one-time task)

1. Ensure [docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) is installed in your environment.
2. Edit [build_and_push_docker.sh](build_and_push_docker.sh) and set the PROJECT_ID AND REGION as appropriate. The container will be stored in Artifact Registry using this information.
3. Ensure the user which runs the script is authenticated as an Google Cloud Identity which has the 
[Artifact Registry Writer](https://cloud.google.com/artifact-registry/docs/access-control#roles) IAM role for the Artifact Registry in your project.
4. Make the script executable and run:
    ```bash
    chmod a+x build_and_push_docker.sh
    ./build_and_push_docker.sh
    ``` 

    The process will build a container called **catalog-mysql-pyspark** and store it in Artifact Registry. This can take up to 5 minutes.

### Run a metadata extraction job with Dataproc Serverless

#### Set up

Before you submit a job to Dataproc Serverless:

1. Create or choose a Cloud Storage bucket to be used as a working directory for Dataproc. Use the path for the **--deps-bucket** parameter below.
2. The service account given in **--service-account** below must have the IAM roles described [here](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/import-using-workflows-custom-source#required-roles) to successfully run Dataproc. You can use this [script](../common_scripts/grant_SA_dataproc_roles.sh) to grant the required roles to your service account.

Note:
* If **--service-account** is not provided then the default Compute Service Account for the project will be assumed.

#### Submit a Dataproc Serverless job

* Ensure you are in the root directory of the connector
    ```bash
    cd mysql-connector
    ```

Run the containerised metadata connector with the following command, substituting appropriate values for your environment and provding a unique batch ID in **--batch** :

```shell
gcloud dataproc batches submit pyspark \
    --project=gcp-project-id \
    --region=us-central1 \
    --batch=mysql-metadata-0001 \
    --deps-bucket=dataplex-metadata-collection-bucket  \
    --container-image=us-central1-docker.pkg.dev/my-gcp-project-id/docker-repo/catalog-mysql-pyspark:latest \
    --service-account=projectnumber-compute@developer.gserviceaccount.com \
    --jars=mysql-connector-j-9.2.0.jar \
    --network=default \
    main.py \
--  --target_project_id gcp-project-id \
      --target_location_id global	\
      --target_entry_group_id mysql \
      --host the-mysql-server \
      --port 3306 \
      --user dataplexagent_mysql \
      --password_secret projects/gcp-project-number/secrets/dataplexagent_mysql \
      --database employees \
      --output_bucket gcs_output_bucket_path \
      --output_folder mysql_metadata
```

Note:
* If you need to use a different version of the JDBC jar you can store it in a Cloud Storage bucket and give the bucket path **--jar** parameter (ie --jars=gs://path/to/jar/mysql-connector-j-9.X.Y.jar)

See the [documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/reference/dataproc/batches/submit/pyspark) for more information about Dataproc Serverless pyspark jobs.

## Create an end-to-end metadata extraction and import pipeline to universal catalog

An end-to-end metadata extraction and import pipeline with monitoring can be created using [Workflows](https://cloud.google.com/workflows) and scheduled to run on a regular basis.

Follow the documentation here: [Import metadata from a custom source using Workflows](https://cloud.google.com/dataplex/docs/import-using-workflows-custom-source) and use [this yaml file](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/cloud-dataplex/blob/main/managed-connectivity/cloud-workflows/byo-connector/templates/byo-connector.yaml) as a template.

An example of input parameters for creating an import job with Workflows can be found in the [workflows](workflows/) directory.
